---
tags:
  - geography
---

## Location
**To be added**

## Overview
Palestine (Greek: Παλαιστίνη, Palaistínē; Latin: Palaestina; Arabic: فِلَسْطِينَ, Filasṭīn, Falasṭīn, Filisṭīn; Hebrew: פלשתינה, Palestīna) is a geographic region in West Asia. It is usually considered to include Israel and the State of Palestine (i.e. West Bank and Gaza Strip), though some definitions also include part of northwestern Jordan.

The first written records referring to Palestine emerged in the 12th-century BCE Twentieth dynasty of Egypt, which used the term "Peleset" for the neighboring people or land. In the 8th century BCE, the Assyrians referred to the region as "Palashtu" or "Pilistu". In the Hellenistic period, these names were carried over into Greek, appearing in the Histories of Herodotus in as "Palaistine". The Roman Empire initially used other terms for the region, such as Judaea, but renamed the region Syria Palaestina after the Bar Kokhba revolt.[2] During the Byzantine period, the region was split into the provinces of Palaestina Prima, Palaestina Secunda and Palaestina Tertia. Following the [[Muslim]] conquest of the Levant, the military district of Jund Filastin was established. Palestine's boundaries have changed throughout history, but it has generally comprised the southern portion of wider regional designations such Syria or the Levant. It conceptually overlaps with several historical and cultural terms, including Canaan, and the Promised Land, Holy Land and Land of Israel in Judeo-Christian tradition.

As the birthplace of Judaism and Christianity, the region of Palestine has a tumultuous history as a crossroads for religion, culture, commerce, and politics. In the Bronze Age, it was inhabited by the Canaanites; the Iron Age saw the emergence of [[Israel]] and Judah, two related kingdoms inhabited by the Israelites. It has since come under the sway of various empires, including the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Neo-Babylonian Empire, and the Achaemenid Persian Empire. Revolts by the region's Jews against Hellenistic rule brought a brief period of regional independence under the Hasmonean dynasty, which ended with its gradual incorporation into the Roman Empire (later the Byzantine Empire).

In the 7th century, Palestine was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate, ending Byzantine rule in the region; Rashidun rule was succeeded by the Umayyad Caliphate, the Abbasid Caliphate, and the Fatimid Caliphate. Following the collapse of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, which had been established through the Crusades, the population of Palestine became predominantly Muslim. In the 13th century, it became part of the Mamluk Sultanate, and after 1516, part of the Ottoman Empire. During World War I, it was captured by the United Kingdom as part of the Sinai and Palestine campaign. Between 1919 and 1922, the League of Nations created the [[Mandate for Palestine]], which directed the region to be under British administration as Mandatory Palestine. Tensions between [[Jews]] and Arabs escalated into the 1947–1949 Palestine war, which ended with the territory of the former British Mandate divided between Israel vis-à-vis Jordan (in the West Bank) and Egypt (in the Gaza Strip); later developments in the Arab–Israeli conflict culminated in Israel's seizure of both territories, which has been among the core issues of the ongoing [[Israel and Palestine conflict]].[3][4][5] 

## Gaza
>[!Source]-
>Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaza_Strip

The Gaza Strip (/ˈɡɑːzə/;[4] Arabic: قِطَاعُ غَزَّةَ Qiṭāʿ Ġazzah [qɪˈtˤɑːʕ ˈɣaz.za]), or simply Gaza, is a Palestinian exclave on the eastern coast of the Mediterranean Sea,[5] bordered by Egypt on the southwest and Israel on the east and north. Together, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank make up the State of Palestine, which has been under [[Israel]]i military occupation since 1967.[6]

The smaller of the two Palestinian territories,[7] Gaza is separated from the West Bank by Israel. Both are nominally under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority,[8] however Gaza is governed by [[Hamas]], a militant, Sunni Islamic organization,[9] which has ruled the territory since an internal conflict between Palestinian factions in 2007 that followed their electoral victory in 2006.[10][11] Since then, Gaza has been under a full Israeli-led, and Egyptian supported, land, sea and air blockade. This prevents people and goods from freely entering or leaving the territory, leading to the territory often being called an "open-air prison".[12]

The Gaza Strip is 41 km (25 mi) long, from 6 to 12 km (3.7 to 7.5 mi) wide, and has a total area of 365 km2 (141 sq mi).[13][14] With around 2 million Palestinians[15] on approximately 365 km2 (141 sq mi) of land, Gaza has a high population density (comparable to that of Hong Kong).[16][17] The majority of Palestinians in Gaza, which contains eight refugee camps, are descendants of refugees who fled or were expelled from the area that became Israel after the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.[18] Sunni Muslims make up most of Gaza's population, with a Palestinian Christian minority. Gaza has an annual population growth rate of 2.91% (2014 est.), the 13th-highest in the world.[14]

Due to the Israeli blockade, Gaza suffers from shortages of water, electricity and medicines. The United Nations, as well as at least 19 human rights organizations, have urged Israel to lift its siege on Gaza.[19][20] Israel unilaterally withdrew its military forces and dismantled its Israeli settlements in Gaza in 2005, and does not consider the territory held under military occupation. The United Nations, International Committee of the Red Cross, and many human rights organization however continue to consider the occupying power as Israel controls Gaza's borders, with the exception of the Egyptian border, airspace and access to the sea and exercises what they consider to be effective military control over the territory.[21][22][23